agent-guide.md, before:

# Fintonico — Agent Execution Guide (Local v0)

> **Purpose:** This guide is the playbook for agents extending Fintonico toward a reliable, locally testable double-entry finance system.  
> **Status:** Foundations through **Step 7** are complete and verified (`npm run test` on 2025‑02‑14 00:54 UTC). The next focus areas are cashflow accuracy and settings management.

---

## 0) Rules of Engagement

- **Deterministic first:** Enforce double-entry invariants, idempotent imports, and explicit reconciliation—no hidden magic.  
- **Local only:** Node 20+, npm (or pnpm). Avoid external APIs except the optional FX fixture loader.  
- **Tests every step:** Each section lists acceptance checks—add/extend Vitest suites accordingly.  
- **Single source of truth:** The service layer and ledger selectors own financial calculations; UI should only render derived data.

Baseline stack:
- TypeScript + Node (tsx/ts-node)
- Vitest for tests
- Zod for validation
- Express/Fastify optional for local HTTP harness

---

## Completed Foundations (Steps 1‑7)

### ~~1) Domain Types & In-Memory Store~~
Completed ✅ — Validated by `src/tests/types.test.ts`.
- **Goal:** Define core domain types (Account, Entry, EntryLine, Category, StatementLine, Rule, FxRate) with invariants enforced via Zod; back them with in-memory repositories keyed by deterministic IDs.  
- **Acceptance (met):** Invalid account types and currency mismatches are rejected at creation time.

### ~~2) Balancing & Currency Integrity~~
Completed ✅ — Covered by `src/tests/balance.test.ts`.
- **Goal:** Implement `validateBalanced(entryId, lines[], baseCurrency)` enforcing zero-sum base balances, direction/sign consistency, and base-currency alignment.  
- **Acceptance (met):** Unbalanced entries, inverted debit signs, or mixed base currencies throw typed errors.

### ~~3) FX Snapshot Module (Local Fixture)~~
Completed ✅ — Exercised in `src/tests/fx.test.ts`.
- **Goal:** Provide `fx.ensure` and `fx.getRate` utilities using in-memory storage with deterministic lookups; no network access.  
- **Acceptance (met):** Missing rates raise `FxMissingError`; stored rates return consistently; same-currency shortcuts return `1`.

### ~~4) Entry Creation Service (Double-Entry Only)~~
Completed ✅ — See `src/tests/entries.create.test.ts`.
- **Goal:** Build `entries.create` to derive base amounts via FX, validate balance, enforce `externalId` idempotency, and attach categories with full confidence.  
- **Acceptance (met):** Balanced entries persist, cross-currency transfers respect FX snapshots, duplicate `externalId`s no-op.

### ~~5) Import Pipeline (CSV → Statement Lines)~~
Completed ✅ — Verified by `src/tests/imports.test.ts`.
- **Goal:** Parse CSV files to deterministic `StatementLine`s with `externalId` hashes, upserting into the statement store.  
- **Acceptance (met):** Re-importing identical files yields duplicates without reinsertion, malformed rows are reported with reasons.

### ~~6) Rules Engine & Agent Stub~~
Completed ✅ — Confirmed in `src/tests/rules.test.ts`.
- **Goal:** Evaluate ordered rules with basic matchers before falling back to a deterministic keyword agent; apply categories only when confidence ≥ 0.85.  
- **Acceptance (met):** Rules override agent suggestions; low-confidence agent hints are surfaced for review.

### ~~7) Reconciliation Engine~~
Completed ✅ — Covered by `src/tests/reconcile.test.ts`.
- **Goal:** Implement auto/manual reconciliation between entries and statement lines using amount/date windows; update entry status on matches.  
- **Acceptance (met):** Exact matches within the window auto-link; manual linking handles unresolved cases.

---

## Upcoming Work

### 8) Cashflow Statement Accuracy (Selectors + UI)

**Goal:** Replace ad-hoc `periodIncome - periodExpenses` math with a ledger-backed cashflow statement powering dashboard KPIs.

**Implementation Notes**
- Add `getCashflowStatement(from: Date, to: Date)` to `src/selectors/finance`:
  - Filter to cash-equivalent accounts (cash, checking, savings, wallets); derive inflows/outflows by transaction type (`income`, `expense`, `transfer`).
  - Return `{ inflows: Money, outflows: Money, net: Money, breakdown: Array<{ source, accountId?, amount: Money }> }`.
  - Use booked amounts for historical consistency; normalise via `useCurrencyStore.convertMoney`.
- Tag synthetic recurring transactions (if not already) so generated instances are counted once per period.
- Update `Dashboard` to consume the selector (memoised) and surface loading/error states with the existing `ErrorBoundary`.
- Document expected behaviour in `README.md` cashflow section once implemented.

**Acceptance Criteria**
- `src/tests/cashflow.test.ts` fixture ensures:
  - Net cashflow equals change in aggregate cash balances for a period.
  - Expense-only periods report inflows = 0, net negative.
  - Cross-currency movements respect stored FX rates with tolerance ±0.01.
- Optional UI test (`src/tests/Dashboard.cashflow.test.tsx`) validating the rendered KPI matches selector output.
- Manual: Seed sample income/expense entries, confirm dashboard cashflow matches spreadsheet reference.

---

### 9) Settings Modal & Currency Management

**Goal:** Provide a central modal for toggling visible currencies and adjusting finance UI preferences.

**Implementation Notes**
- Create `src/components/Settings/SettingsModal.tsx`, triggered from navigation (gear icon). Modal should include:
  - **Currency Visibility:** Checkbox list for each supported currency; base currency is fixed/disabled. Persist selections via extended `useCurrencyStore` state (`enabledCurrencies`, `toggleCurrency`, `resetCurrencies`), stored with `persist`.
  - **General Preferences:** Placeholder toggles (e.g., “Show savings opportunities”) to expand later.
  - Actions: `Save`, `Cancel`, `Reset to defaults` (confirm dialog optional).
- Update `CurrencySelector` and currency badges to rely on `enabledCurrencies`, falling back to registry only when list empty.
- Surface warnings when API keys for FX/LLM are missing so users understand disabled capabilities.

**Acceptance Criteria**
- `src/tests/currency-visibility.test.ts`:
  - Toggling currencies updates `enabledCurrencies` without removing the base currency.
  - State survives store rehydration (`persist` re-creates store with saved toggles).
- `src/tests/settings-modal.test.tsx` (React Testing Library):
  - Modal reflects store state on open, commits `Save`, honours `Reset`.
- Manual: Disable all but one currency, reload page, verify selection persists and UI reflects changes.

---

### 10) Reports API (Cashflow & Net Worth)

**Goal:** Expose repeatable reporting services for cashflow timelines and point-in-time net worth, using the improved selectors.

**Implementation Notes**
- Build `reports.cashflow({ from, to, interval })` aggregating `getCashflowStatement` by interval (monthly default).
- Implement `reports.networth({ asOf })` leveraging ledger balances for assets/liabilities, converting to base currency.
- Ensure services accept optional filters (account IDs, categories) for future dashboards.

**Acceptance Criteria**
- `src/tests/reports.test.ts`:
  - Fixture-driven expectations for cashflow buckets across multiple months.
  - Net worth at `asOf` matches manual ledger tally.
- Updated documentation in `docs/reports.md` (or inline comments) describing API usage.

---

### 11) Minimal Local HTTP Surface (Optional but Recommended)

**Goal:** Offer a thin Express/Fastify layer for manual and automated regression checks.

**Implementation Notes**
- Endpoints: `POST /entries`, `POST /imports/csv`, `POST /reconcile/auto`, `GET /reports/cashflow`.
- Validate payloads with Zod; return structured errors mirroring service exceptions.
- Wire to in-memory services; no authentication yet.

**Acceptance Criteria**
- `src/tests/http.test.ts` (Supertest):
  - Balanced entry → 201 + entry payload.
  - Unbalanced entry → 400 with error code.
  - Re-imported CSV yields duplicates summary.
  - Auto-reconcile returns counts > 0 for eligible matches.

---

### 12) Frontend Smoke Harness (Optional)

**Goal:** Build a minimal React page (outside production app) exercising the HTTP surface for manual verification.

**Implementation Notes**
- Components: Add Expense, Add Transfer, Run Import (CSV upload), Auto-Reconcile, View Cashflow.
- Use deterministic fixtures seeded from the in-memory store.
- Optionally gate behind `npm run dev:local`.

**Acceptance Criteria**
- Manual: Run harness, complete flows without console errors.
- Optional Playwright smoke asserting success toasts/responses.

---

## 13) Definition of Done (Local v0)

All items below must be true to sign off Local v0:

1. Balance validator gate-keeps incorrect entries; cross-currency entries remain deterministic.  
2. FX rates are fixture-driven with graceful fallbacks.  
3. Entry creation, imports, rules, and reconciliation services pass their Vitest suites.  
4. Cashflow selector powers dashboard KPIs with tested fixtures.  
5. Settings modal persists currency visibility and preferences across reloads.  
6. Reporting services expose cashflow/net worth with regression tests.  
7. Optional HTTP layer passes Supertest coverage when enabled.  
8. `npm run test` succeeds (Vitest).  
9. Manual smoke confirms dashboard cashflow aligns with ledger fixtures.

---

## 14) Commands & Tooling

Suggested `package.json` scripts:
```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "dev": "vite",
    "dev:server": "nodemon --exec tsx server/index.ts",
    "dev:all": "npm run dev:server & npm run dev",
    "test": "vitest run --reporter=tap",
    "test:watch": "vitest",
    "lint": "eslint . --ext .ts,.tsx",
    "typecheck": "tsc --noEmit"
  }
}
```

Recommended libraries: `zod`, `vitest`, `tsx`, `papaparse` (or `csv-parse`), `supertest`, `@testing-library/react`, `playwright` (optional).

---

## 15) Gherkin Acceptance Reference

**Create expense**
```
Given baseCurrency = "MXN" and an account "Checking" (MXN)
When create entry with lines:
  - Checking credit -250 MXN
  - Food debit +250 MXN
Then sum(baseAmount)=0 and status="unreconciled"
```

**Cross-currency transfer**
```
Given Account A USD, Account B MXN, baseCurrency=MXN
And fx(MXN,USD, 2025-10-18)=18.50
When transfer $100 USD A→B bookedAt 2025-10-18
Then two lines with fxRate snapshots and sum(base)=0
```

**Import idempotency**
```
Given a CSV with 3 lines for account X
When import file
Then inserted=3, duplicates=0
When import same file again
Then inserted=0, duplicates=3
```

**Auto-reconcile**
```
Given entry -250.00 MXN on 2025-10-18
And statement -250.00 MXN on 2025-10-19 (same account)
When auto-reconcile with window=3
Then linked_count=1 and entry status='reconciled'
```

---

## 16) Next Phase Hooks (When Database Arrives)

- Replace in-memory repositories with interfaces backed by Postgres/Supabase.  
- Enforce balance checks via DB constraints/triggers in addition to service validation.  
- Persist FX tables with historical backfill endpoints.  
- Retain all Vitest suites; add integration tests targeting the database.

Commit message:

updated month selector logic, now showing correctly the summary of income and expenses

agent-guide.md, after:

# Fintonico — Agent Execution Guide (Local v0)

> **Purpose:** This guide is the playbook for agents extending Fintonico toward a reliable, locally testable double-entry finance system.  
> **Status:** Foundations through **Step 7** are complete and verified (`npm run test` on 2025‑02‑14 00:54 UTC). The next focus areas are cashflow accuracy and settings management.

---

## 0) Rules of Engagement

- **Deterministic first:** Enforce double-entry invariants, idempotent imports, and explicit reconciliation—no hidden magic.  
- **Local only:** Node 20+, npm (or pnpm). Avoid external APIs except the optional FX fixture loader.  
- **Tests every step:** Each section lists acceptance checks—add/extend Vitest suites accordingly.  
- **Single source of truth:** The service layer and ledger selectors own financial calculations; UI should only render derived data.

Baseline stack:
- TypeScript + Node (tsx/ts-node)
- Vitest for tests
- Zod for validation
- Express/Fastify optional for local HTTP harness

---

## Completed Foundations (Steps 1‑7)

### ~~1) Domain Types & In-Memory Store~~
Completed ✅ — Validated by `src/tests/types.test.ts`.
- **Goal:** Define core domain types (Account, Entry, EntryLine, Category, StatementLine, Rule, FxRate) with invariants enforced via Zod; back them with in-memory repositories keyed by deterministic IDs.  
- **Acceptance (met):** Invalid account types and currency mismatches are rejected at creation time.

### ~~2) Balancing & Currency Integrity~~
Completed ✅ — Covered by `src/tests/balance.test.ts`.
- **Goal:** Implement `validateBalanced(entryId, lines[], baseCurrency)` enforcing zero-sum base balances, direction/sign consistency, and base-currency alignment.  
- **Acceptance (met):** Unbalanced entries, inverted debit signs, or mixed base currencies throw typed errors.

### ~~3) FX Snapshot Module (Local Fixture)~~
Completed ✅ — Exercised in `src/tests/fx.test.ts`.
- **Goal:** Provide `fx.ensure` and `fx.getRate` utilities using in-memory storage with deterministic lookups; no network access.  
- **Acceptance (met):** Missing rates raise `FxMissingError`; stored rates return consistently; same-currency shortcuts return `1`.

### ~~4) Entry Creation Service (Double-Entry Only)~~
Completed ✅ — See `src/tests/entries.create.test.ts`.
- **Goal:** Build `entries.create` to derive base amounts via FX, validate balance, enforce `externalId` idempotency, and attach categories with full confidence.  
- **Acceptance (met):** Balanced entries persist, cross-currency transfers respect FX snapshots, duplicate `externalId`s no-op.

### ~~5) Import Pipeline (CSV → Statement Lines)~~
Completed ✅ — Verified by `src/tests/imports.test.ts`.
- **Goal:** Parse CSV files to deterministic `StatementLine`s with `externalId` hashes, upserting into the statement store.  
- **Acceptance (met):** Re-importing identical files yields duplicates without reinsertion, malformed rows are reported with reasons.

### ~~6) Rules Engine & Agent Stub~~
Completed ✅ — Confirmed in `src/tests/rules.test.ts`.
- **Goal:** Evaluate ordered rules with basic matchers before falling back to a deterministic keyword agent; apply categories only when confidence ≥ 0.85.  
- **Acceptance (met):** Rules override agent suggestions; low-confidence agent hints are surfaced for review.

### ~~7) Reconciliation Engine~~
Completed ✅ — Covered by `src/tests/reconcile.test.ts`.
- **Goal:** Implement auto/manual reconciliation between entries and statement lines using amount/date windows; update entry status on matches.  
- **Acceptance (met):** Exact matches within the window auto-link; manual linking handles unresolved cases.

### ~~8) Cashflow Statement Accuracy (Selectors + UI)~~
Completed ✅ — Verified by `src/tests/cashflow.test.ts` and the dashboard KPI integration.
- **Goal:** Drive cashflow KPIs from a selector that aggregates only cash-equivalent accounts, classifies inflows/outflows by source, and normalises amounts to the active base currency.  
- **Acceptance (met):** Net cashflow equals ledger cash balance deltas, expense-only windows report zero inflow, cross-currency scenarios respect FX rates, and the dashboard card formats the selector output without ad-hoc math.

---

## Upcoming Work

### 9) Settings Modal & Currency Management

**Goal:** Provide a central modal for toggling visible currencies and adjusting finance UI preferences.

**Implementation Notes**
- Create `src/components/Settings/SettingsModal.tsx`, triggered from navigation (gear icon). Modal should include:
  - **Currency Visibility:** Checkbox list for each supported currency; base currency is fixed/disabled. Persist selections via extended `useCurrencyStore` state (`enabledCurrencies`, `toggleCurrency`, `resetCurrencies`), stored with `persist`.
  - **General Preferences:** Placeholder toggles (e.g., “Show savings opportunities”) to expand later.
  - Actions: `Save`, `Cancel`, `Reset to defaults` (confirm dialog optional).
- Update `CurrencySelector` and currency badges to rely on `enabledCurrencies`, falling back to registry only when list empty.
- Surface warnings when API keys for FX/LLM are missing so users understand disabled capabilities.

**Acceptance Criteria**
- `src/tests/currency-visibility.test.ts`:
  - Toggling currencies updates `enabledCurrencies` without removing the base currency.
  - State survives store rehydration (`persist` re-creates store with saved toggles).
- `src/tests/settings-modal.test.tsx` (React Testing Library):
  - Modal reflects store state on open, commits `Save`, honours `Reset`.
- Manual: Disable all but one currency, reload page, verify selection persists and UI reflects changes.

---

### 10) Reports API (Cashflow & Net Worth)

**Goal:** Expose repeatable reporting services for cashflow timelines and point-in-time net worth, using the improved selectors.

**Implementation Notes**
- Build `reports.cashflow({ from, to, interval })` aggregating `getCashflowStatement` by interval (monthly default).
- Implement `reports.networth({ asOf })` leveraging ledger balances for assets/liabilities, converting to base currency.
- Ensure services accept optional filters (account IDs, categories) for future dashboards.

**Acceptance Criteria**
- `src/tests/reports.test.ts`:
  - Fixture-driven expectations for cashflow buckets across multiple months.
  - Net worth at `asOf` matches manual ledger tally.
- Updated documentation in `docs/reports.md` (or inline comments) describing API usage.

---

### 11) Minimal Local HTTP Surface (Optional but Recommended)

**Goal:** Offer a thin Express/Fastify layer for manual and automated regression checks.

**Implementation Notes**
- Endpoints: `POST /entries`, `POST /imports/csv`, `POST /reconcile/auto`, `GET /reports/cashflow`.
- Validate payloads with Zod; return structured errors mirroring service exceptions.
- Wire to in-memory services; no authentication yet.

**Acceptance Criteria**
- `src/tests/http.test.ts` (Supertest):
  - Balanced entry → 201 + entry payload.
  - Unbalanced entry → 400 with error code.
  - Re-imported CSV yields duplicates summary.
  - Auto-reconcile returns counts > 0 for eligible matches.

---

### 12) Frontend Smoke Harness (Optional)

**Goal:** Build a minimal React page (outside production app) exercising the HTTP surface for manual verification.

**Implementation Notes**
- Components: Add Expense, Add Transfer, Run Import (CSV upload), Auto-Reconcile, View Cashflow.
- Use deterministic fixtures seeded from the in-memory store.
- Optionally gate behind `npm run dev:local`.

**Acceptance Criteria**
- Manual: Run harness, complete flows without console errors.
- Optional Playwright smoke asserting success toasts/responses.

---

## 13) Definition of Done (Local v0)

All items below must be true to sign off Local v0:

1. Balance validator gate-keeps incorrect entries; cross-currency entries remain deterministic.  
2. FX rates are fixture-driven with graceful fallbacks.  
3. Entry creation, imports, rules, and reconciliation services pass their Vitest suites.  
4. Cashflow selector powers dashboard KPIs with tested fixtures.  
5. Settings modal persists currency visibility and preferences across reloads.  
6. Reporting services expose cashflow/net worth with regression tests.  
7. Optional HTTP layer passes Supertest coverage when enabled.  
8. `npm run test` succeeds (Vitest).  
9. Manual smoke confirms dashboard cashflow aligns with ledger fixtures.

---

## 14) Commands & Tooling

Suggested `package.json` scripts:
```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "dev": "vite",
    "dev:server": "nodemon --exec tsx server/index.ts",
    "dev:all": "npm run dev:server & npm run dev",
    "test": "vitest run --reporter=tap",
    "test:watch": "vitest",
    "lint": "eslint . --ext .ts,.tsx",
    "typecheck": "tsc --noEmit"
  }
}
```

Recommended libraries: `zod`, `vitest`, `tsx`, `papaparse` (or `csv-parse`), `supertest`, `@testing-library/react`, `playwright` (optional).

---

## 15) Gherkin Acceptance Reference

**Create expense**
```
Given baseCurrency = "MXN" and an account "Checking" (MXN)
When create entry with lines:
  - Checking credit -250 MXN
  - Food debit +250 MXN
Then sum(baseAmount)=0 and status="unreconciled"
```

**Cross-currency transfer**
```
Given Account A USD, Account B MXN, baseCurrency=MXN
And fx(MXN,USD, 2025-10-18)=18.50
When transfer $100 USD A→B bookedAt 2025-10-18
Then two lines with fxRate snapshots and sum(base)=0
```

**Import idempotency**
```
Given a CSV with 3 lines for account X
When import file
Then inserted=3, duplicates=0
When import same file again
Then inserted=0, duplicates=3
```

**Auto-reconcile**
```
Given entry -250.00 MXN on 2025-10-18
And statement -250.00 MXN on 2025-10-19 (same account)
When auto-reconcile with window=3
Then linked_count=1 and entry status='reconciled'
```

---

## 16) Next Phase Hooks (When Database Arrives)

- Replace in-memory repositories with interfaces backed by Postgres/Supabase.  
- Enforce balance checks via DB constraints/triggers in addition to service validation.  
- Persist FX tables with historical backfill endpoints.  
- Retain all Vitest suites; add integration tests targeting the database.
